In the previous episode, we implemented a policy for updating tickets, and we only allow
users to edit their own tickets.
They can't edit someone else's.
But of course, there are times when we want a user to be able to edit someone else's ticket.
Like for example, if that user is a manager, that makes perfect sense.
Managers really aren't the only users that should have that capability.
Like for example, if we had an admin.
A manager isn't necessarily an admin, so their permissions aren't going to align for everything,
but for updating a ticket, yeah, that would probably be something that they would have
in common.
But if there were any other kind of users that had special permissions for updating
tickets, then we would need to check for that as well.
And of course, this is unsustainable because as more and more types of users are added,
we have to add those checks.
So of course, that's where the roles come into play.
So that if a user is in a role that is ticket update, then yes, they can update that ticket.
But roles have their own problems.
Like for example, we would have to implement a role system or we would need to use a package
that sets one up for us.
But in our case, we are using Sanctum Tokens and Sanctum Tokens have a permission system
built in.
It's the abilities that we can assign to a token whenever we create that token.
So inside of our auth controller, whenever we create a token, when a user signs in, we
are assigning abilities.
Now, as it is right now, they have complete and total control over everything because
well, that's the ability that we assigned.
But let's say that a manager signed in, you know, we could say that they would have a
ticket create ability, a ticket update ability, you know, and things like that.
And if just a normal user signed in, they would be able to create tickets, but they
might have a slightly different ability so that they can only update their own tickets.
So of course, the abilities that we assign here are going to be different based upon
the user that signs in.
And one of the really nice things about this idea of token abilities is that we don't have
to limit it just to our purposes.
If for whatever reason, we wanted to allow users to create tokens with certain permissions,
we can do that.
If you create a new Laravel application using Jetstream and you opt into the API stuff out
of the box, users have the ability to create new tokens and assign permissions.
So this concept of token abilities is very flexible.
We can use it for just about any kind of purpose that we might need.
The only problem in our case is that, you know, we will have different abilities for
different types of users.
So whenever a user signs in and we create that token and we assign the abilities, what
I want is something like this to where we would have an abilities class where we would
call get abilities.
We could pass in the user and then that would return the abilities for that particular user.
So let's implement that inside of the app folder.
Let's create a permissions folder and I'm going to version this, although when it comes
to abilities, I'm not sure that we need to version it, but I can see where we might want
to.
So I'm going to version this and I'm just going to call it abilities.php.
Namespace is app permissions v1.
And we're going to make this a final class because I don't think we want to use this
as a base class for anything.
And here we will define several string constants because whenever we need to check for an ability,
we would have to check a string and we don't want to keep typing the same string over and
over again throughout our application because we're human, we are going to make a mistake.
So we want some kind of constant value that we can use to take all of, not necessarily
the guesswork, but definitely the human error out of working with strings.
So this abilities class is going to have a lot of constants.
So in this case, we're going to have a constant called create ticket and its value is going
to be the ability name, ticket create.
That is going to be the ability.
So then we would need an update ticket, a replace ticket, and a delete ticket.
And of course, we need to update those string values.
But these are very generic.
The idea of ticket update means that you can update any ticket that you need.
So what we need to do then is have something that just normal users would have, like update
own ticket and delete own ticket, so that the ability would actually be something like
this, ticket own update.
But then, you know, managers would need to have the ability to manage user accounts.
So we could do something like this to where we would have, once again, create, update,
and replace, but it would be for the users.
And then we would change the string values to be user create, user update, replace, and
delete.
So then we would have our static method called get abilities.
We would get the user supplied to us, because we would need to see if the user is a manager.
And we don't have this flag yet, so we're going to need to add this to our model.
But if the user is a manager, then we can return all of the abilities that they would
need, such as create ticket, update, and all of that stuff.
They would also need to be able to do the same thing for the user resources.
But if the user is not a manager, then for right now, we could just have an else statement.
As we add other classes of users, then we can, of course, make this whatever we need
it to be.
So for just normal users, they should be able to create a ticket, they should be able to
update own ticket, and delete own ticket.
I don't think that they need to do anything else.
So that means, inside of our ticket policy, what we can do then is first of all check
if the user has a token that can, and we will use our abilities class to update ticket.
Then we would return true.
But then we also need to check if the user's token can update their own ticket, then we
return the statement that we had before, otherwise we return false.
Now of course, we need to update our database.
So let's do this.
Let's go to our user model, and you know what, we don't need to do anything there.
We do, however, need to go to our user migration.
So let's open up create users table.
Let's add a boolean field called is manager, and let's give this a default of false.
But we also need a manager user.
So let's go to our database seeder.
We'll leave everything else as it is.
But now let's create a manager user.
So the email is arbitrary.
We can use whatever we want.
I'm going to use manager at manager.com.
The password, we will encrypt using bcrypt password.
The name, I'm going to set as just the manager.
And then we will set the is manager to true.
And that should be good enough.
So now let's just wipe out the database and start completely over.
So we'll use artisan to dbwipe.
That will wipe everything out so that then we can run the migration.
And then we can seed the database.
And that should get us all set up as far as our database is concerned.
Let's go to our auth controller.
We do need a use statement for this abilities class.
So let's bring that in.
Everything else should be okay now.
So we just need to make sure that this works.
But now that we have a different set of users, we need to look.
So let's grab this user with an ID of one.
Let's grab that email address.
Let's go to Postman.
And we want to sign in with that user information.
So the email address is whatever we copied from the database.
Password is, of course, password.
So we will send that request.
We got our token.
So let's copy that.
Let's go to our bearer variable, paste that in, save it.
So now we should be able to get the tickets for that user.
So let's do that.
Let's get the tickets for the user number one.
And we can see that the ticket with an ID of two is one that we should be able to edit.
So let's just change the status.
It is set to active right now.
So let's change that to completed.
Let's go to the patch ticket.
That was the ticket with an ID of two.
The status, we will set to C for completed.
We don't want to include anything else.
We want just that status.
So whenever we send that, we see, yes, indeed, that was successfully updated.
So let's try to edit the ticket with an ID of one.
We should not be able to.
So I'm not even going to worry to see what the status was,
because that is exactly what we get.
You are not authorized to update that resource.
So that works just fine.
But let's sign out.
And let's sign in as our manager.
So we will change email once again to manager at manager.com.
We will send that request.
We will get a new token.
So let's copy that.
We want to put that inside of our bearer variable.
And so now we should be able to edit that ticket.
I guess we should be sure to see what that value is to begin with.
So the ticket with an ID of one is active as well.
So let's say that that is going to be canceled.
So let's change that to an X.
Let's send that.
We should, yep, that worked just fine.
So our managers can update all of the tickets that they need.
The users can only update their own tickets.
So with our update policy finished, we can just use this as a basis for
everything else.
And for example, for deleting, all we need to do is check if
the token has the ability to delete the ticket or delete own ticket.
All of the other logic is going to be the same.
And the replace is going to be a lot simpler because
the typical user does not have the ability to replace the ticket.
So this will be a little bit different in that we will check if the token
has the replace ticket ability, and if so, then we return true.
Otherwise, we return false.
And really creating is going to be essentially the same thing.
Let's call this store just because we're keeping it in line with
the convention of being the name of the method on the controller.
So we have delete, replace, store goes next.
The ability is create ticket, and that should be fine.
So we should be able to go to the ticket controller and just apply these policies.
So let's see, for the store method, we are finding that user.
I guess I took out the code to actually create that ticket.
We need to add that back in.
But for right now, what I'm concerned with is to use the is able.
Is that what we called it?
Let's scroll down to the, it's this.
Okay, so yeah, so we will check to see if the user can store this.
We will pass in null here because we don't have a ticket.
But then let's add the to do, create ticket there.
Let's scroll on down to the replace.
So we fetch the ticket before we update that.
We need to check our policy for replace, and
then essentially the same thing for delete.
So once again, check our policy, but
we are checking the delete policy, and we should be good to go.
And one of the really nice things about using token abilities is that we can be
as granular as we need, for example, for updating a ticket.
Managers should be able to update everything about a ticket, but
a typical user should only be able to update certain fields.
Because otherwise, they would be able to replace everything, and
we don't want to provide that functionality to them.
So in the next episode, we will look at how we can do that.